---
layout: archive
title: "CV"
permalink: /cv/
author_profile: true
redirect_from:
  - /resume
---

{% include base_path %}

Abstract
======
<div style="text-align: justify">

I have a long-standing interest in genetic mouse models and their application to understanding human disease. My PhD studies in the Joyce Lab focused on uncovering the transcriptional regulation and developmental ontogeny of tumor-associated macrophages in brain tumors. To this end, I employed computational tools and a number of different genetic lineage tracing and tumor models with complementary analysis on patient-derived specimen. As I studied the functions of myeloid cells in disease, I became increasingly interested in the epigenetic mechanisms regulating their development, and how these processes can be co-opted in leukemia. Concurrent to my PhD studies on tumor-associated macrophages, the emerging field of clonal hematopoiesis was uncovering that the tumor microenvironment was not the genetically stable entity it was widely considered. My interest in myeloid development and malignancy, and the seminal work on clonal hematopoiesis in the Levine lab made for a perfect landing spot for my postdoctoral studies. 

Following my PhD studies, I began work in the Levine lab on modeling a new set of cell interactions, not between the microenvironment and tumor cells, but rather between subclones in leukemic disease. These questions have spurred the development of a new set of tools capable of (in)activating mutations in different cellular compartments, assessing oncogenic dependency and tracing mutation order. Since development of our model systems required iterative design, multiple mouse crosses, and late-onset disease models, I focused early on on bolstering my technical skillset on collaborative efforts to engage in new molecular biology, cell culture and computational techniques that complemented  the expertise from my PhD. These experiences granted me exposure to new clinical questions and methodologies in epigenetic research (Hi-C, ChIP-seq, ERRBS, single cell DNA-sequencing) as well as introduced me to new technologies in single cell biology and synthetic biology. The mature implementation of the new genetic models (involving new recombinases, reporters, and alleles), is a long vision that I am wholly committed to completing in both the Levine lab and beyond in my own lab. 

My long-term goal is to lead an independent research group studying mechanisms driving tumorigenesis, including sequential mutational acquisition and interaction between tumor subclones. In the future I will continue to work on new genetic tools to trace and manipulate genes and clones in aberrant hematopoiesis and leukemic progression. My training in the tumor microenvironment and hematopoiesis, coupled with my comprehensive computational skillset, provides a foundation of expertise towards understanding the functional contributions of subclonal mutations in disease. 
 </div>

  
Education
======
* B.A. Vanderbilt University 2010
* Ph.D Cancer Biology, Gerstner Sloan Kettering Graduate Program 2016

Positions and Employment
======
* 2007 - 2010 Undergraduate Researcher, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN
* 2009 - 2010 Teaching Assistant, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN
* 2010 - 2016 Graduate Student, Gerstner Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
* 2016 -  Research Scholar, MSKCC, New York, NY
* 2016 - 2017 Teaching Assistant - Computational Biology, Gerstner Sloan Kettering Graduate Program, New York, NY
* 2017 - 2019   Instructor - Quantitative Biology, Gerstner Sloan Kettering Graduate Program, New York, NY


Other Experience and Professional Memberships
======
* 2010 - 2016 Graduate Student Member, New York Academy of Sciences
* 2012  Attendee, Statistical Analysis of Genomics Data - Cold Spring Harbor Labs

Honors
======
* 2008 - 2010 Summer Undergraduate Research Fellow, Vanderbilt University
* 2010  Undergraduate Research Award, Vanderbilt University
* 2010 - 2016 Grad into Med Initiative, HHMI
* 2010  cum laude, Vanderbilt University
* 2011  Geoffrey Beene Fellowship, Gerstner Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
* 2012 - 2016 NRSA F31, National Cancer Institute
* 2017 - 2021 Sohn Fellow, Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation 

Contributions to science
======

<div style="text-align: justify" markdown="1">

1.	**Lineage tracing and transcriptional profiling of tumor associated macrophage in brain malignancy:** My PhD studies focused on uncovering the developmental history of tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) in brain tumors. Developmental and functional diversity exists among tissue-resident macrophages, where unique transcriptional profiles bestow cells with tissue-specific functions. However, it is unknown whether the developmental origins of macrophages affect their roles in cancer. In one study we found that both bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) and microglia (MG) infiltrate brain tumors, possessing distinct transcriptional, epigenetic and activation states. These studies led to the identification of CD49D as a marker only expressed on BMDM, and absent on MG, allowing, for the first time, separate identification between MG and BMDM in mouse and human tumors. Follow-up studies (currently under review), revealed that MG and BMDM undergo distinct transcriptional responses to ionizing radiation (IR), and that blockade of CD49D synergized with IR to promote extended survival in mice.  In the second half of my PhD, I collaborated with Dr. Florian Klemm to perform immunophenotyping and transcriptional characterization of over 10 immune cell types from patient brain tumor samples at MSKCC. The computational methodologies I implemented in my PhD highlighted the value of not only data availability, but also data accessibility.  To further this cause, I collaborated with Dr. Massimo Squatrito at the Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO) to develop Gliovis: a web portal focused on curating glioma patient genomics datasets and making them readily accessible to researchers. These studies comprised the primary focus on my PhD, where I was responsible for experimental design, execution, computational analysis, and writing of the first author manuscripts below.  Two other manuscripts are in the late stage of review and manuscript preparation.
    - **Bowman RL**, Klemm F, Akkari L, Pyonteck SM, Sevenich L, Quail DF, Dhara S, Simpson K, Gardner EE, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Brennan CW, Tabar V, Gutin PH, Joyce JA. Macrophage Ontogeny Underlies Differences in Tumor-Specific Education in Brain Malignancies. Cell Rep. 2016 Nov 22;17(9):2445-2459. PubMed PMID: 27840052; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5450644.  Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.10.052
    -	**Bowman RL**, Wang Q, Carro A, Verhaak RG, Squatrito M. GlioVis data portal for visualization and analysis of brain tumor expression datasets. Neuro Oncol. 2017 Jan;19(1):139-141. PubMed PMID: 28031383; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5193031. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/now247
    - Klemm F, Maas RR, **Bowman RL**, Kornete M, Soukup K,  Nassiri S, Brouland JP, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA,  Brennan C, Tabar V, Gutin PH, Daniel RT, Hegi ME, Joyce JA. Interrogation of the Microenvironmental Landscape in Brain Tumors Reveals Disease-Specific Alterations of Immune Cells. Cell. 2020 May 23;S0092-8674(20)30569-9. PMID: 32470396. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.05.007

2.	**Therapeutic targeting of tumor-associated macrophages in brain malignancy through CSF1R blockade:** Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are a major cellular constituent of the brain tumor microenvironment. Therapeutic approaches aimed at depleting TAMs have been under investigation, however reprogramming the cells to enhance anti-tumor activity and limit pro-tumorigenic activity holds much potential.  We investigated whether inhibition of CSF-1R, a receptor critical to macrophage maturation and survival, would present a therapeutic target in glioma.  In these studies we found that CSF-1R blockade did not deplete TAMs, but rather re-educated these cells leading to loss of pro-tumorigenic functions.  This led to robust glioma regression and increased long-tem survival.  With continued treatment we found that tumors would eventually develop resistance, which we found to be mediated by TAM-specific upregulation of IGF-1.  These studies collectively demonstrate that TAMs are a tractable therapeutic target in brain tumors, whereby resistance can arise in alteration in the microenvironment.  In two studies below I performed all computational analyses and contributed to experimental design and manuscript writing.
    -	Quail DF, **Bowman RL**, Akkari L, Quick ML, Schuhmacher AJ, Huse JT, Holland EC, Sutton JC, Joyce JA. The tumor microenvironment underlies acquired resistance to CSF-1R inhibition in gliomas. Science. 2016 May 20;352(6288):aad3018. PubMed PMID: 27199435; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5450629. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aad3018
    -	Pyonteck SM*, Akkari L*, Schuhmacher AJ*, **Bowman RL**, Sevenich L, Quail DF, Olson OC, Quick ML, Huse JT, Teijeiro V, Setty M, Leslie CS, Oei Y, Pedraza A, Zhang J, Brennan CW, Sutton JC, Holland EC, Daniel D, Joyce JA. CSF-1R inhibition alters macrophage polarization and blocks glioma progression. Nat Med. 2013 Oct;19(10):1264-72. PubMed PMID: 24056773; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3840724. Available at : https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3337

3.	**Interrogating the contribution of the tumor microenvironment in metastasis:** Metastasis is the most common cause of cancer deaths, with most patients succumbing to disseminated disease, not the primary tumor. Many studies have explored the genetics and transcriptional networks of the primary tumor development, however less is known about how the tumor cells respond to seeding a new environment and their changes over time. In one study, (Sevenich et al). we sought to characterize how metastatic breast cancer cells respond to distinct microenvironments of the bone, lung and brain. Utilizing xenograft models of breast cancer metastasis, we identified host and tumor specific changes associated with disease stage, further identifying genes associated prognosis for site-specific metastasis. Cathepsin S (CTSS) emerged as a candidate factor that possessed contributions from both tumor cells and the macrophages in brain metastases. My specific role in these studies involved computational and experimental work as well as writing of the manuscript. In a subsequent study we sought to understand how cathepsin protease secretion was regulated. Using a bottom up approach, we identified critical type II inflammatory cytokines capable of eliciting cathepsin secretion. Transcriptional analyses and further mechanistic studies revealed a necessary role for the unfolded protein response in cytokine mediated protease secretion. My specific role in the study involved experimental design, execution, computational analysis, and contributing to the writing in Sevenich et al, as well as writing the co-first author manuscript in Yan et al.
    -	Sevenich L, **Bowman RL**, Mason SD, Quail DF, Rapaport F, Elie BT, Brogi E, Brastianos PK, Hahn WC, Holsinger LJ, Massagué J, Leslie CS, Joyce JA. Analysis of tumour- and stroma-supplied proteolytic networks reveals a brain-metastasis-promoting role for cathepsin S. Nat Cell Biol. 2014 Sep;16(9):876-88. PubMed PMID: 25086747; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4249762.  Available at: https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb3011
    -	Yan D*, Wang HW*, **Bowman RL***, Joyce JA. STAT3 and STAT6 Signaling Pathways Synergize to Promote Cathepsin Secretion from Macrophages via IRE1α Activation. Cell Rep. 2016 Sep 13;16(11):2914-2927. PubMed PMID: 27626662; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5559199. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.08.035
    -	Akkari L, Gocheva V, Quick ML, Kester JC, Spencer AK, Garfall AL, **Bowman RL**, Joyce JA. Combined deletion of cathepsin protease family members reveals compensatory mechanisms in cancer. Genes Dev. 2016 Jan 15;30(2):220-32. PubMed PMID: 26773004; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4719311. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.270439.115 
    -	Zhang M, Di Martino JS, **Bowman RL**, Campbell NR, Baksh SC, Simon-Vermot T, Kim IS, Haldeman P, Mondal C, Yong-Gonzales V, Abu-Akeel M, Merghoub T, Jones DR, Zhu XG, Arora A, Ariyan CE, Birsoy K, Wolchok JD, Panageas KS, Hollmann T, Bravo-Cordero JJ, White RM. Adipocyte-Derived Lipids Mediate Melanoma Progression via FATP Proteins. Cancer Discov. 2018 Aug;8(8):1006-1025. PubMed PMID: 29903879; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC6192670. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.cd-17-1371

4.	**Investigating the contributions of signaling and epigenetic regulators in normal and aberrant hematopoiesis:** In the Levine lab we utilize a combination of genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) and molecular profiling from patient samples to understand how different mutations found in myeloid malignancies regulate normal and malignant hematopoiesis. In one study, we focused on understanding the role of cohesin loss of function mutations on hematopoiesis.  The cohesin complex is a ring-like structure involved in sister chromatid cohesion and enhancer-promoter loop formation, and mutations in this complex are often found in clonal hematopoiesis, myelodysplastic syndrome, and acute myeloid leukemia. Here we found that cohesin mutation resulted in decreased chromatin accessibility and subsequent gene expression at loci critical for hematopoietic lineage commitment.   This study afforded me the opportunity to implement new skills in the analysis of ChIP-seq as well as ATAC-seq and their integration with gene expression data.  My specific role in other collaborations involved computational analyses in Kleppe et al and Pronier et al, with experimental support in Pronier et al. In addition to these research articles, Dr. Levine, Dr. Busque and I co-authored a review on the progression of clonal hematopoiesis towards malignancy.
    -	Viny AD, **Bowman RL**, Liu Y, Lavallée VP, Eisman SE, Xiao W, Durham BH, Navitski A, Park J, Braunstein S, Azizi E, Witkin M, Baslan T, Ott CJ, Pe’er D, Dekker J, Koche R, Levine RL. Cohesin Members Stag1 and Stag2 Display Distinct Roles in Chromatin Accessibility and Topological Control of HSC Self-Renewal and Differentiation. Cell Stem Cell. 2019 Nov 7; 25 (5), 682-696.e8. PubMed PMID:  31495782; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC6842438. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2019.08.003
    -	Pronier E, **Bowman RL**, Ahn J, Glass J, Kandoth C, Merlinsky TR, Whitfield JT, Durham BH, Gruet A, Hanasoge Somasundara AV, Rampal R, Melnick A, Koche RP, Taylor BS, Levine RL. Genetic and epigenetic evolution as a contributor to WT1-mutant leukemogenesis. Blood. 2018 Sep 20;132(12):1265-1278. PubMed PMID: 30064973; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC6148447.  Available at: https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2018-03-837468

    -	Kleppe M, Spitzer MH, Li S, Hill CE, Dong L, Papalexi E, De Groote S, **Bowman RL**, Keller M, Koppikar P, Rapaport FT, Teruya-Feldstein J, Gandara J, Mason CE, Nolan GP, Levine RL. Jak1 Integrates Cytokine Sensing to Regulate Hematopoietic Stem Cell Function and Stress Hematopoiesis. Cell Stem Cell. 2017 Oct 5;21(4):489-501.e7. PubMed PMID: 28965767; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5847260.  Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2017.08.011Get
    -	**Bowman RL**, Busque L, Levine RL. Clonal Hematopoiesis and Evolution to Hematopoietic Malignancies. Cell Stem Cell. 2018 Feb 1;22(2):157-170. PubMed PMID: 29395053; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5804896. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2018.01.011 
5.	**Elucidating the clonal trajectories of hematological malignancies:** Clonal hematopoiesis (CH) is defined by the presence of somatically mutated hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells in otherwise healthy individuals.  Many of the mutations found in clonal hematopoiesis also occur in myeloid malignancies, including the epigenetic modifiers DNTM3A, TET2, and ASXL1, and as such individuals with clonal hematopoiesis are at greater risk for the development of a hematological malignancy including acute myeloid leukemia (AML). While clonal hematopoiesis is a frequent phenomenon, occurring in over half of people over the age of 60, acute myeloid leukemia remains a rare disease, suggesting that there remains a fundamental gap in knowledge on how the relatively benign clonal hematopoiesis transforms the to an aggressive myeloid disease.  To address these questions, I sought to understand the genetic clonal structure of clonal hematopoiesis, and how transformation to acute myeloid changes that structure. In this study (Miles*, Bowman* et al), using single cell DNA-sequencing, we found that CH is largely characterized by the presence of 1-3 mutations all in separate cells/clones.  Meanwhile, AML possess not only more mutations, but a higher diversity of clones. We further found that particular mutations biased differentiation towards a more mature myeloid fate.  In a separate study, (Comen*, Bowman*, Selenica* et al JNCI), we identified CH clones in tumor infiltrating lymphocytes in solid tumors of patients with non-hematological malignancies, highlighting the persistence of these mutant cells decades before the manifestation of secondary hematological disease. In both of these studies, my specific role involved experimental design, execution, computational analysis, and writing both co-first author manuscripts.
    -	Miles LA*, **Bowman RL***, Merlinsky TR, Csete IS, Ooi A, Durruthy-Durruthy R, Bowman M, Famulare F, Patel MA, Mendez P, Ainali C, Manivannan M, Sahu S, Goldberg AD, Bolton K, Zehir A, Rampal R, Carroll MP, Meyer SE, Viny AD, Levine RL. Single cell mutational profiling delineates clonal trajectories in myeloid malignancies. BioRxiv 938860 [Preprint]. February 9, 2020 [cited 2020 February 25]. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.07.938860
    -	Comen EA*, **Bowman RL***, Selenica P*, Kleppe M, Farnoud NR, Pareja F, Weigelt B, Hill CE, Alon A, Geyer FC, Akturk G, Reis-Filho JS, Norton L, Levine RL. Evaluating Clonal Hematopoiesis in Tumor-Infiltrating Leukocytes in Breast Cancer and Secondary Hematologic Malignancies. J Natl Cancer Inst, 112 (1), 107-110 2020 Jan 1. PMID: 31504684. Available at https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djz157

</div>

Publications
======
Full list of publications can be found here:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/myncbi/robert.bowman.1/bibliography/public/
